---
layout: post
title: Kolmogorovâ€“Smirnov

---

<p class="meta">02 December 2015 - San Francisco</p>

A cumulative distribution function (CDF) is the theoretical function which will
tell you that some random variable can be found with a probability less than or
equal to some value, p - which is normally found on the y-axis. The empirical
cumulative distribution function (or EDF), on the other hand, is just your
observed CDF. Where CDFs increment in steps of 1/n for an n-sized sample, an
EDFs is usually much more sporadic, taking on the look of a step function with
the horizontal sections representing where your data is most sparse.

![a cdf (grey) charted next to the edf (black)][cdf-edf]

One measure that we are using in CSSR is a two-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, or
a KS test for short. The underlying principle is that a KS test will compare the
EDF of your sample to a reference; which could be the CDF of a reference
distribution or the EDF of your second sample, depending on if your test is one-
or two- sided.

The KS statistic quantifies the maximum possible difference between
probabilities of the sample and reference. From what I can tell, the two-sample
KS test is one of the most useful, and general, nonparametric methods since we
can draw comparisons of any two samples purely on what we observe. Because we
are looking at largest differences, what we measures is sensitive to location
within the distribution, as well as the shape -- the more sparse the dataset in
regions that are more pertinent (not the extremes), the worse off your
statistic.

![a KS-statistic (black) with a cdf (red) and edf (blue)][ks-statistic]

Since a two-sample KS test only checks if the samples come from the same
distribution, we don't necessarily know what that distribution is. For this
purpose, there are tables of critical values which you can use to find out if
the data you have is normally distributed, or not. One of these tables
[you can find here][table].

-----

Journal section, for anyone interested in the status of my research:

Switching tracks to the status of CSSR, I think I did pretty good job getting a
prototype out the door. Of course the thing is pretty buggy, but for never
having touched scala in such a long time, I'm pretty proud happy with how easy
it was to come up with a clean solution while taking advantage of a number of
scala features (as well as a matrix library). Perhaps if things go well I might
have time to introducing scalaz... however testing, as well as a Viterbi
implementation (as a part of some knowledge dives), stand in the way of that.
Primarily, I've been investigating the KS test was imperative since we have our
own KS test implemented, ported from
[Numerical Recipes in C: The Art of Scientific Computing][c], and I'd like to
have it tested.


[hsw2v]: https://github.com/abailly/hs-word2vec
[cdf-edf]: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/17/Empirical_CDF.png
[ks]: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/cf/KS_Example.png
[table]: http://www.mathematik.uni-kl.de/~schwaar/Exercises/Tabellen/table_kolmogorov.pdf
[c]: www2.units.it/ipl/students_area/imm2/files/Numerical_Recipes.pdf
[ks-statistic]: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/cf/KS_Example.png

<!--  LocalWords:  abailly's hs vec hsw scalaz Viterbi Kolmogorov Smirnov cdf
 -->
<!--  LocalWords:  https CDF ECDF edf png
 -->
